Create inline_link_in_paragraph_is_distinguishable_ be4d0c.md (#1010)
act-rules/act-rules.github.io: _rules/inline-link-in-paragraph-has-distinguishable-style-on-hover-and-focus-548868.md

---
id: 548868
name: Inline link has different foreground color and distinguishable style on hover and focus
rule_type: atomic
description: |
  This rule checks that inline links with different foreground color have a style on hover and focus that distinguishes them from the surrounding text
accessibility_requirements:
input_aspects:
  - DOM Tree
  - CSS Styling
acknowledgments:
  authors:
    - Brian Bors
    - Carlos Duarte
  previous authors:
    - Wilco Fiers
---

## Applicability

This rule applies to:
- **(visible link)** any [visible][] HTML element that is a [semantic link][],
- **(belongs to a line box)** where the closest element (including itself) that generates an [inline box][] is part of a [line box][], 
- **(with other elements)** which has [inline boxes][inline box] generated from an element containing [visible][] [text nodes][text node], 
- **(that are not links)** which do not have a [semantic link][] as a [descendant][] in the [flat tree][].

**Note:** The test targets are visible link elements that are part of a block of content that is displayed inline.

## Expectation

Each target element has:

> - a [computed][] [foreground color][] different from the [computed][] [foreground color][] of the other [descendant][] elements of the same [line box][] that do not contain [visible][] [text nodes][text node] of [semantic links][semantic link] (if all such elements have the same [foreground color][]);

Reviewer: This is missing an "and" after the first listitem

> - a [computed][] [foreground color][] different from the [computed][] [foreground color][] of the other [descendant][] elements of the same [line box][] that do not contain [visible][] [text nodes][text node] of [semantic links][semantic link] (if all such elements have the same [foreground color][]);

Author: Updated the expectation to use the ACT definition of foreground colors of text

- [C15: Using CSS to change the presentation of a user interface component when it receives focus](https://www.w3.org/WAI/WCAG21/Techniques/css/C15)

## Test Cases

### Passed

#### Passed Example 1

This link, that is a descendant of a paragraph element, has a text contrast of more than 3:1 compared to the other text in the paragraph. When the link receives focus, an underline appears. When the link receives hover, an underline appears.

```html
<style>
	p {
		color: black;
		background-color: white;
	}
	a {
		text-decoration: none;
		color: #d14826;
		background-color: white;
	}
	a:hover,
	a:focus {
		text-decoration: underline;
	}
</style>
<p>Read about WAI on the <a href="http://w3.org/WAI">WAI webpage</a>.</p>
```

### Failed

#### Failed Example 1

This link, that is a descendant of a paragraph element, has no visual cues of being recognized as a link with the underline removed.

```html
<style>
	a.test {
		text-decoration: none;
	}
</style>
<p>Read about WAI on the <a class="test" href="http://w3.org/WAI">WAI webpage</a>.</p>
```

> 

Reviewer: I am missing a failed example where the 2 foreground colours don't have a contrast of at least 3:1

Author: Added such an examepl

accessibility_requirements: # Remove whatever is not applicable
  wcag20:1.4.1: # Use of Color (A)
    forConformance: true
    failed: not satisfied
    passed: further testing needed
    inapplicable: further testing needed

input_aspects:
  - DOM Tree
  - CSS Styling

acknowledgements:
  authors:
    - Brian Bors
    - Carlos Duarte
  previous authors:
    - Wilco Fiers
---

## Applicability

This rule applies to any HTML element which:

- has the [semantic role][] of ['link'][link] or a [semantic role][] that inherits from the ['link'][link] role; and
- is a [descendant][] in the [flat tree][] of a `p`, `li` or `td` HTML elements or elements with a [semantic role][] of ['listitem'][listitem] or ['cell'][cell] (with the closest [ancestor][] in the [flat tree][] being henceforth referred to as the _ancestor_ element); and
- has [descendant][] [text nodes][text node] in the [flat tree][] that are [visible][]; and
- the _ancestor_ element has other [descendant][] [visible][] [text nodes][text node] in the [flat tree][].

## Expectation

> Each target element has one of the following:

Reviewer 2: These seem like two entirely different scenarios. Why not use two rules? That way you can split this "and a distinguishing style" into its own expectation for each. I don't think tagging it on at the end of a sentence is enough here.

Author: Done

> - a [foreground color][] different from the [foreground color][] of the other descendant visible text nodes of the same _ancestor_ element (if all have the same [foreground color][]), that has at least a 3:1 [contrast ratio](https://www.w3.org/TR/WCAG21/#dfn-contrast-ratio) and a [distinguishing style][] both when the target element [gains focus][focused] and the target element is [hovered][]; or

Reviewer 2: Define "descendant", "visible" and "text nodes".

> - a [foreground color][] different from the [foreground color][] of the other descendant visible text nodes of the same _ancestor_ element (if all have the same [foreground color][]), that has at least a 3:1 [contrast ratio](https://www.w3.org/TR/WCAG21/#dfn-contrast-ratio) and a [distinguishing style][] both when the target element [gains focus][focused] and the target element is [hovered][]; or

Reviewer 2: What is "other descendant visible text nodes"? What exactly does this mean? Remember this isn't "color" but "colors". Text nodes have multiple foreground colors, including all anti-aliased pixels. Do you want all colors from the test target to have a 3:1 contrast with that of all other text nodes? What if there are other links?

Author: Good arguments. But the revision made it harder to read. Will appreciate further comments after completing the other changes.

accessibility_requirements:
input_aspects:
  - DOM Tree
  - CSS Styling
acknowledgments:
  authors:
    - Brian Bors
    - Carlos Duarte
    - Wilco Fiers
---

## Applicability

This rule applies to any [visible][] HTML element that is a [semantic link][], for which all the following is true:

- **link text**: the element has [visible][] [text nodes][text node] as [descendants][descendant] in the [flat tree][]; and
- **non-link line text**: the element is [rendered on a line][] containing [visible][] [text nodes][text node] that are not [descendants][descendant] in the [flat tree][] of a [semantic link][]; or
- **different color**: the element's [foreground color][] and the [foreground color][] of the **non-link line text** elements have a [highest possible contrast][] that is at least 3.0:1, or the element's [background color][] and the [background color][] of the **non-link line text** elements have a [highest possible contrast][] that is at least 3.0:1.

## Expectation

For each test target, at least one of the following is true when it is [focused][] or [hovered][]:

> - **distinguishing style**: the element has a [distinguishing style][] not based on color alone from the **non-link line text** elements; or

Author: The `*-color` longhand properties cannot cover everything as you correctly point out. Missing out, at least:
- box-shadows
- background images that have only different colors
- color for fonts

That's why we kept the reference to color so "generic". It always meant to us "if you take away the color information you would still be able to distinguish the elements based on another style information".

I don't see how we would be able to convey this in a way that doesn't make this sentence really complex... Any suggestions?

> - **distinguishing style**: the element has a [distinguishing style][] not based on color alone from the **non-link line text** elements; or

Reviewer 3: Yeah, I agree that we can't make it really good. 
I think that "not based on color alone" is OK-ish. As in I don't really see how else it could be interpreted and guess it isn't really ambiguous. So let's keep it…

> - **distinguishing content**: element has content (such as an image or text), located in the proximity of the element (i.e. there is no other content visually in between this content and the target element), that indicates the test target is a link.

Author: Content can be anything, and I don't think we should go down the rabbit hole of trying to identify every possible content that can be used to "indicate the test target is a link". If "indicate the test target is a link" is not ambiguous I believe we're good. Any content that "indicates the test target is a link" would pass the rule. I don't think random white pixels, or images of black holes indicate a link. (But in certain contexts they might, and the rule would pass in those contexts).

> - **distinguishing content**: element has content (such as an image or text), located in the proximity of the element (i.e. there is no other content visually in between this content and the target element), that indicates the test target is a link.

Author: If every word is preceded by a link icon, I don't think an evaluator would consider the link icon to be something that "indicates the test target to be a link". 

But I don't think "distinguishing content" is complex enough to warrant a definition. I think that part of the expectation is still clear enough.

> - **distinguishing content**: element has content (such as an image or text), located in the proximity of the element (i.e. there is no other content visually in between this content and the target element), that indicates the test target is a link.

Reviewer 3: Yeah, I think that "indicates" is enough here. I don't think we can really make it clearer without making it too complex…

> - **distinguishing content**: element has content (such as an image or text), located in the proximity of the element (i.e. there is no other content visually in between this content and the target element), that indicates the test target is a link.

Reviewer 3: Agreed that it might end up too complex…
I'm a bit afraid that "content" could be a bit ambiguous. I guess "content that indicates the target is a link" should be good enough OTOH (subjective, but OK).
Maybe reordering the sentence around that could help 🤔 
"the element has content that indicates it is a link located in its proximity"
Hum, doesn't read super well either (does located refers to "link" or to "content that…"?)

rule_type: atomic
description: |
  This rule checks that inline links are distinguishable from the surrounding text through a difference in style or content when the links are hovered or focused.
accessibility_requirements:
input_aspects:
  - DOM Tree
  - CSS Styling
acknowledgments:
  authors:
    - Brian Bors
    - Carlos Duarte
    - Wilco Fiers
---

## Applicability

This rule applies to any [visible][] HTML element that is a [semantic link][], for which all the following is true:

- **link text**: the element has [visible][] [text nodes][text node] as [descendants][descendant] in the [flat tree][]; and
- **non-link line text**: the element is [rendered on a line][] containing [visible][] [text nodes][text node] that are not [descendants][descendant] in the [flat tree][] of a [semantic link][]; or
- **different color**: the element's [foreground color][] and the [foreground color][] of the **non-link line text** elements have a [highest possible contrast][] that is at least 3.0:1, or the element's [background color][] and the [background color][] of the **non-link line text** elements have a [highest possible contrast][] that is at least 3.0:1.

## Expectation

> For each test target, at least one of the following is true when it is [focused][] or [hovered][]:

Reviewer 4: The phrase "when it is [focused][] or [hovered] is placed sometimes in the middle of the sentence, some others at the end. I think we need to place it consistently either at the end or in the middle of the sentences when it appears in each of the rules.
"

---
id: 548868

> name: Inline link has distinguishable style or content on hover and focus

Reviewer 3: Reading the unrelated https://www.w3.org/WAI/WCAG21/Understanding/non-text-contrast.html I found:
> The Use of Color success criterion addresses changing only the color (hue) of an object or text without otherwise altering the object's form. The principle is that contrast ratio (the difference in brightness) can be used to distinguish text or graphics. For example, G183: Using a contrast ratio of 3:1 with surrounding text and providing additional visual cues on focus for links or controls where color alone is used to identify them is a technique to use a contrast ratio of 3:1 with surrounding text to distinguish links and controls. **In that case the Working Group regards a link color that meets the 3:1 contrast ratio relative to the non-linked text color as satisfying the Success Criteria 1.4.1 Use of color since it is relying on contrast ratio as well as color (hue) to convey that the text is a link.**

(emphasise mine)
I feel this indicates that G183 is indeed an overstatement and that a 3:1 colour contrast (and no other cue) is enough to pass 1.4.1.

…which could lead to further simplification of the rule by having "distinguishing style" include "distinguishing colors (with a 3:1 ratio)"…

> name: Inline link has distinguishable style or content on hover and focus

Author: Updated the applicability to consider hue and the expectation to consider color (through distinguishable styles)

This rule applies to any [visible][] HTML element that is a [semantic link][], for which all the following is true:

- **link text**: the element has [visible][] [text nodes][text node] as [descendants][descendant] in the [flat tree][]; and
- **non-link line text**: the element is [rendered on a line][] containing [visible][] [text nodes][text node] that are not [descendants][descendant] in the [flat tree][] of a [semantic link][]; or
- **different color**: the element's [foreground color][] and the [foreground color][] of the **non-link line text** elements have a [highest possible contrast][] that is at least 3.0:1, or the element's [background color][] and the [background color][] of the **non-link line text** elements have a [highest possible contrast][] that is at least 3.0:1.

## Expectation

For each test target, at least one of the following is true when it is [focused][] or [hovered][]:

- **distinguishing style**: the element has a [distinguishable style][] not based on color alone from the **non-link line text** elements; or

> - **distinguishing content**: the element has content (such as an image or text) located in the proximity of the element (i.e. there is no other content visually in between this content and the target element), that indicates the test target is a link.

Reviewer 4: I think something can be done here to clarify this assumption.

* we say "proximity" (which to me does not convey the idea of adjacent or side by side)
* and then we say "there is no other content visually between this content and the test target" (which seems to convey the idea that such content needs to be adjacent to the test target

which seems awkward to me.

Maybe:

```suggestion
- **distinguishing content**: the element has adjacent content (such as an image or text) that indicates the test target is a link.
```

This rule applies to any [visible][] HTML element that is a [semantic link][], for which all the following is true:

- **link text**: the element has [visible][] [text nodes][text node] as [descendants][descendant] in the [flat tree][]; and
- **non-link line text**: the element is [rendered on a line][] containing [visible][] [text nodes][text node] that are not [descendants][descendant] in the [flat tree][] of a [semantic link][]; and

> - **different hue**: the element's [foreground color][] and the [foreground color][] of the **non-link line text** elements have a [different hue][], or the element's [background color][] and the [background color][] of the **non-link line text** elements have a [different hue][].

Reviewer 3: Same remark about plural.

## Expectation

For at least one element of the set comprised by the test target and all of its [visible][] [descendant][] elements in the [flat tree][], at least one of the following is true when the element is [focused][] or [hovered][]:

- **distinguishing style**: the element has a [distinguishable style][] not based on color alone from the **non-link line text** elements; or
- **distinguishing content**: the element has adjacent content (such as an image or text) that indicates the test target is a link.

## Assumptions

> - A 3:1 contrast difference, which is the minimum required to meet WCAG 2.0, between the colors of the link text and the non-link text is enough for [Success Criterion 1.4.1 Use of Color](https://www.w3.org/WAI/WCAG21/Understanding/use-of-color.html). This value is part of [technique G183](https://www.w3.org/WAI/WCAG21/Techniques/general/G183) but is not specified in the [1.4.1 success criterion](https://www.w3.org/WAI/WCAG21/Understanding/use-of-color.html).

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
- A 3:1 contrast difference, which is the minimum required to meet WCAG 2, between the colors of the link text and the non-link text is enough for [Success Criterion 1.4.1 Use of Color](https://www.w3.org/WAI/WCAG21/Understanding/use-of-color.html). This value is part of [technique G183](https://www.w3.org/WAI/WCAG21/Techniques/general/G183) but is not specified in the [1.4.1 success criterion](https://www.w3.org/WAI/WCAG21/Understanding/use-of-color.html).
```

#### Passed Example 7

> This link, that is distinguishable by color from the other text in the same line, has an icon that appears when the link is focused or hovered. This icon distinguishes the element as a link.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
This link, that is distinguishable by color from the other text in the same line, has an icon that appears when the link is focused or hovered. This icon indicates the element as a link.
```
to keep the vocabulary of the expectation.
